Constructing Canonical Forcing Fields
=====================================

.. code:: ipython3

    # data handling
    import numpy as np
    import xarray as xr
    
    # plotting
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import cmocean
    
    # helper functions
    import utils

Introduction
------------

This notebook will cover the synthesizing of the following forcing
fields: 1) A homogeneous current field, 2) A zonal current jet, 3) A
mesoscale eddy, 4) A constant bathymetry field, 5) and an idealized
island.

With bonus files for a sloped beach.

All fields will be steady (no variation in time), a core assumption of
the ray tracing equations.

.. code:: ipython3

    output_dir = "./forcing/"

Domain Parameters
-----------------

For these synthesized datasets, we will be using a 100 km by 200 km
domain with 1 km grid spacing. Mantaray expects the grid to be in units
of meters.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Parameters for the background domain [m]
    Lx = 200_000  # x-length
    Ly = 100_000  # y-length
    dx = 1_000  # x grid spacing
    dy = 1_000  # y grid spacing

.. code:: ipython3

    # x/y grid
    x = np.arange(0, Lx, dx)
    y = np.arange(0, Ly, dy)
    xv, yv = np.meshgrid(x, y)

Currents
--------

No Currents
~~~~~~~~~~~

This field will have the same u/v velocity (0 m/s) at all grid points
and will be used for examples where we are interested in studying how
the waves respond to different depth fields.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Choose a u/v current speed [m/s]
    u = 0
    v = 0

.. code:: ipython3

    # grid u/v
    U_homog = np.full_like(xv, u)
    V_homog = np.full_like(yv, v)

.. code:: ipython3

    # build into an xarray dataset
    ds_homog = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "u": (
                ["y", "x"],
                U_homog,
                {"long_name": "zonal current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
            "v": (
                ["y", "x"],
                V_homog,
                {"long_name": "meridional current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
        }
    )

Note: data must be saved using the ``NETCDF3_CLASSIC`` format.

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_homog.to_netcdf(output_dir + "homogeneous.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    # Plot using helper function
    utils.plot_current_field(xv, yv, ds_homog, skip=5, q_scale=0.1)



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_17_0.png


Zonal Jet
~~~~~~~~~

This field will have a zonal current jet whose profile follows a
Gaussian distribution:

.. math::


   f(x) = A \cdot e^{-\frac{(x-\mu)^2}{2\sigma^2}}

.. code:: ipython3

    # Choose the maximum speed of the jet [m/s]
    U_max = 0.3
    width = 0.25  # controls how 'fat' the distribution (jet) is

.. code:: ipython3

    x_profile = np.linspace(-1, 1, len(y))
    U_profile = U_max * np.exp((-(x_profile**2)) / (2 * width**2))

.. code:: ipython3

    plt.plot(U_profile)




.. parsed-literal::

    [<matplotlib.lines.Line2D at 0x166369e80>]




.. image:: ./idealized_fields_22_1.png


We extend the profile along the x-axis and assume there is no zonal
current.

.. code:: ipython3

    U_jet = np.ones((len(y), len(x))) * U_profile[:, np.newaxis]
    V_jet = np.zeros_like(U_jet)

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_jet = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "u": (
                ["y", "x"],
                U_jet,
                {"long_name": "zonal current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
            "v": (
                ["y", "x"],
                V_jet,
                {"long_name": "meridional current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
        }
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_jet.to_netcdf(output_dir + "zonal_jet.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    utils.plot_current_field(xv, yv, ds_jet, skip=5, q_ref=0.3, q_scale=0.075)



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_27_0.png


Mesoscale Eddy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will construct a idealized parabolic mesoscale eddy following White
and Fornberg 1997.

.. code:: ipython3

    L_eddy = 80_000  # Diameter of the eddy [m]

.. code:: ipython3

    R_eddy = L_eddy / 2

The number of grid points must be odd to ensure that the eddy is
properly centered.

.. code:: ipython3

    N = int(L_eddy / dx) + 1

Similar to our full domain, we make a smaller domain for the eddy.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Create 2D grid
    x_eddy = np.linspace(-R_eddy, R_eddy, N)
    y_eddy = np.linspace(-R_eddy, R_eddy, N)
    
    xv_eddy, yv_eddy = np.meshgrid(x_eddy, y_eddy)

We set the maximum speed of the Eddy to be 1 m/s to make itâ€™s impact on
rays more dramatic.

.. code:: ipython3

    U_max = 1  # [m/s]

We will use a custom function to create a velocity field for a parabolic
eddy as in White and Fornberg 1997.

.. code:: ipython3

    u_eddy, v_eddy = utils.generate_parabolic_ring_eddy(L_eddy, U_max, xv_eddy, yv_eddy)

We now insert the eddy into a larger domain. We define the center of the
eddy using the units of the domain.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Define the center of the eddy [m]
    center_x = 100_000
    center_y = 50_000

Then, we can create a static background, find the indices of the center
point, and insert the eddy.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Create static background velocity field
    u_background = np.zeros_like(xv).astype(float)
    v_background = np.zeros_like(yv).astype(float)
    
    idx_center_x = int((center_x - L_eddy / 2) / dx)
    idx_center_y = int((center_y - L_eddy / 2) / dy)
    
    # Insert the tapered eddy
    u_background[
        idx_center_y : idx_center_y + len(x_eddy), idx_center_x : idx_center_x + len(x_eddy)
    ] += u_eddy
    v_background[
        idx_center_y : idx_center_y + len(x_eddy), idx_center_x : idx_center_x + len(x_eddy)
    ] += v_eddy

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_eddy = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "u": (
                ["y", "x"],
                u_background,
                {"long_name": "zonal current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
            "v": (
                ["y", "x"],
                v_background,
                {"long_name": "meridional current velocity", "units": "m/s"},
            ),
        }
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_eddy.to_netcdf(output_dir + "mesoscale_eddy.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    utils.plot_current_field(xv, yv, ds_eddy, skip=5, q_ref=0.3, q_scale=0.05)



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_46_0.png


Constant Bathymetry
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For the different current examples, we will use a constant deep
bathymetry field.

.. code:: ipython3

    bathy_const = np.full_like(xv, 4000)  # [m]

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_const = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "depth": (["y", "x"], bathy_const, {"long_name": "bathymetry", "units": "m"}),
        }
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_const.to_netcdf(output_dir + "4000m_bathymetry.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12, 6))
    
    c = ax.contourf(xv, yv, bathy_const, cmap=cmocean.cm.deep)
    
    fig.colorbar(c, ax=ax, label="Depth [m]")
    
    ax.set_xlabel("X (m)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (m)")
    
    ax.set_title("Constant Bathymetry")
    
    ax.set_aspect("equal")
    
    plt.show()



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_52_0.png


Gaussian Island
---------------

We will also show an example of no currents but with an island sea
mound.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Island parameters [m]
    L_mound = 1e5  # diameter of the sea mound
    H_background = 100  # background depth
    elevation = 50  # maximum height of the island (above sea level)

.. code:: ipython3

    x_mound = np.arange(
        -L_mound / 2, L_mound / 2, dx
    )  # x-axis values (symmetrical about 0)
    y_mound = np.arange(
        -L_mound / 2, L_mound / 2, dy
    )  # y-axis values (symmetrical about 0)
    xv_mound, yv_mound = np.meshgrid(x_mound, y_mound)

.. code:: ipython3

    R = np.sqrt(xv_mound**2 + yv_mound**2)
    
    # Normalize the radial distance to range from 0 to L_x/2 (maximum radial distance)
    R_normalized = np.clip(R / (L_mound / 2), 0, 1)  # Normalize radius, clip to [0, 1]
    
    # Use sin^2 function to create the profile, with peak at sin^2(pi/2)
    mound = (H_background + elevation) * np.sin(np.pi * R_normalized / 2 + np.pi / 2) ** 2

.. code:: ipython3

    # Define island center in the larger bathymetry field
    center_x = 100000  # meters
    center_y = 50000  # meters

.. code:: ipython3

    idx_center_x = int((center_x - L_mound / 2) / dx)
    idx_center_y = int((center_y - L_mound / 2) / dy)
    
    bathy_const = np.full_like(xv, H_background).astype(float)
    
    # Subtract the island bump from the bathymetry field
    bathy_island = bathy_const.copy()
    bathy_island[
        idx_center_y : idx_center_y + len(y_mound),
        idx_center_x : idx_center_x + len(x_mound),
    ] -= mound

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_island = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "depth": (["y", "x"], bathy_island, {"long_name": "bathymetry", "units": "m"}),
        }
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_island.to_netcdf(output_dir + "gaussian_island.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12, 6))
    
    c = ax.contourf(xv, yv, bathy_island, cmap=cmocean.cm.deep, levels=50)
    
    is_contour = ax.contour(xv, yv, bathy_island, levels=[0], colors="tan", linewidths=2)
    is_contour = ax.contour(xv, yv, bathy_island, levels=[0], colors="tan", linewidths=2)
    
    
    fig.colorbar(c, ax=ax, label="Depth [m]")
    
    ax.set_xlabel("X (m)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (m)")
    
    ax.set_title("Constant Bathymetry")
    
    ax.set_aspect("equal")
    
    plt.show()



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_62_0.png


Note: following convention, more positive depth is deeper, while more
negative depth is above sea level.

BONUS: A Gentle Beach
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will construct a bathymetry field that linearly increases in depth
along the y-axis.

.. code:: ipython3

    bathy_beach = np.tile(
        np.linspace(250, -10, yv.shape[0])[:, np.newaxis], (1, yv.shape[1])
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_beach = xr.Dataset(
        data_vars={
            "x": (["x"], x),
            "y": (["y"], y),
            "depth": (["y", "x"], bathy_beach, {"long_name": "bathymetry", "units": "m"}),
        }
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    ds_beach.to_netcdf(output_dir + "gentle_slope.nc", format="NETCDF3_CLASSIC")

.. code:: ipython3

    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12, 6))
    
    # Filled contour plot
    c = ax.contourf(xv, yv, bathy_beach, cmap=cmocean.cm.deep, levels=50)
    
    # Add contour line at 0 depth
    zero_contour = ax.contour(
        xv, yv, bathy_beach, levels=[0], colors="magenta", linewidths=2
    )
    
    fig.colorbar(c, ax=ax, label="Depth [m]")
    
    ax.set_xlabel("X (m)")
    ax.set_ylabel("Y (m)")
    ax.set_title("A Gentle Beach")
    
    ax.set_aspect("equal")
    
    plt.show()



.. image:: ./idealized_fields_69_0.png

